Adds Elastic Endpoint command reference (#5778)
elastic/security-docs: docs/management/admin/endpoint-command-ref.asciidoc

[[endpoint-command-ref]]
= {elastic-endpoint} command reference

This page lists the commands for management and troubleshooting of {elastic-endpoint}, the installed component that performs {elastic-defend}'s threat monitoring and prevention.

[NOTE]
====

> * The service is not added to the `PATH` system variable, so you must prepend the commands with the full OS-dependent path:

Reviewer: The previous sentence calls it a "component" and this calls it a "service." It's not majorly confusing, but just feels inconsistent. We could just call it by name here:
```suggestion
* {elastic-endpoint} is not added to the `PATH` system variable, so you must prepend the commands with the full OS-dependent path:
```

** On Windows: `"C:\Program Files\Elastic\Endpoint\elastic-endpoint.exe"`
** On macOS: `/Library/Elastic/Endpoint/elastic-endpoint`
** On Linux: `/opt/Elastic/Endpoint/elastic-endpoint`

> * You must run the commands with elevated privileges—as the root user on POSIX systems, or as Administrator on Windows.

Reviewer: Also unnecessarily technical, could be simpler:
```suggestion
* You must run the commands with elevated privileges—as the root user on Linux and macOS, or as Administrator on Windows.
```

* <<elastic-endpoint-inspect-command, inspect>>
* <<elastic-endpoint-install-command, install>>
* <<elastic-endpoint-memorydump-command, memorydump>>
* <<elastic-endpoint-run-command, run>>
* <<elastic-endpoint-send-command, send>>
* <<elastic-endpoint-status-command, status>>
* <<elastic-endpoint-test-command, test>>
* <<elastic-endpoint-top-command, top>>
* <<elastic-endpoint-uninstall-command, uninstall>>
* <<elastic-endpoint-version-command, version>>

Each of the commands accepts the following logging options:

* `--log [stdout,stderr,debugview,file]`
* `--log-level [error,info,debug]`

[discrete]
[[elastic-endpoint-diagnostics-command]]
== elastic-endpoint diagnostics

Gather diagnostics information from {elastic-endpoint}. This command produces an archive that contains:

- `version.txt`: Version information
- `elastic-endpoint.yaml`: Current policy
- `metrics.json`: Metrics document
- `policy_response.json`: Last policy response
- `system_info.txt`: System information
- `analysis.txt`: Diagnostic analysis report
- `logs` directory: Copy of {elastic-endpoint} log files

[discrete]
=== Example

[source,shell]
------
sudo /Library/Elastic/Endpoint/elastic-endpoint diagnostics

> ------

Reviewer: The examples only include Linux/macOS. I assume admin-level readers wouldn't struggle with this, but it still feels incomplete to omit Windows.

For the serverless/MDX version, it's pretty easy to create a tabbed widget that includes Windows too ([example](https://www.elastic.co/docs/current/serverless/security/uninstall-agent), [code](https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/blob/main/docs/serverless/edr-install-config/uninstall-agent.mdx?plain=1#L17-L28)), but tabs are kind of a nightmare for AsciiDoc. Maybe we could get away with omitting Windows just for AsciiDoc, or use a simpler soft heading format ([example](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/security/master/uninstall-agent.html#uninstall-endpoint)).

Reviewer 2: Can't we just drop the prefix? The note at the top of the article was explaining this, so users should figure it out easily what to do when this won't work for them
```
elastic-endpoint diagnostics
```

Reviewer: > Can't we just drop the prefix? 

Sounds good! Keeps things simple and clear. Maybe update the note to remind readers they'll need `sudo` to run as the root user? Again, the audience is likely tech-savvy enough to know this, but wouldn't hurt to remind them too.

[discrete]
[[elastic-endpoint-help-command]]
== elastic-endpoint help

Show help for the available commands.

[discrete]
=== Example

[source,shell]
------
sudo /Library/Elastic/Endpoint/elastic-endpoint help
------

[discrete]
[[elastic-endpoint-inspect-command]]
== elastic-endpoint inspect

Show the current {elastic-endpoint} configuration.

[discrete]
=== Example

[source,shell]
------
sudo /Library/Elastic/Endpoint/elastic-endpoint inspect
------

[discrete]
[[elastic-endpoint-install-command]]
== elastic-endpoint install

Install {elastic-endpoint} as a system service.

> NOTE: Elastic doesn't publish independent {elastic-endpoint} packages since {elastic-endpoint} is managed by {agent}.

Reviewer: What exactly should the user conclude from this, and what action do we want them to take with this information? Should they _not_ install Endpoint like this, if it's limited in this way? That's kinda what it sounds like, but it's so indirect it's hard to tell.

Reviewer 2: Hi, I wrote the draft, the point here was that users reading this documentation shouldn't start googling (or asking in the community) where to get the Endpoint installation package from. Indeed it also implies they have no business trying to install it by this command. Endpoint is unusable without Agent.

I wont mind to omit this command from the docs entirely if it makes more sense 😉

Reviewer: Thanks for the helpful context @intxgo! I could see us either omitting the command for those reasons, or including it but with an admonition that basically tells the user don't bother using it because standalone Endpoint (without Agent) won't work. 

The main reason I suggest including it is for completeness; if the user can run `elastic-endpoint help` and the output includes `install`, then they might be tempted to try it out.

Reviewer 2: agree, just feel free to reword the note part to make it clearer

[source,shell]
------
sudo /Library/Elastic/Endpoint/elastic-endpoint send metadata
------

[discrete]
[[elastic-endpoint-status-command]]
== elastic-endpoint status

Retrieve the current status of the running {elastic-endpoint} service. The command also returns the last known status of {agent}.

[discrete]
=== Options

`--output`::
Control the level of detail and formatting of the information. Valid values are:

* `human`: Returns limited information when {elastic-endpoint}'s status is `Healthy`. If any policy actions weren't successfully applied, the relevant details are displayed.
* `full`: Always returns the full status information.
* `json`: Always returns the full status information.

[discrete]
=== Example

[source,shell]
------
sudo /Library/Elastic/Endpoint/elastic-endpoint status --output json
------

[discrete]
[[elastic-endpoint-test-command]]
== elastic-endpoint test

Perform the requested test.

[discrete]
=== Subcommands

`output`::
Test whether {elastic-endpoint} can connect to remote resources.

[discrete]
=== Example

[source,shell]
------
sudo /Library/Elastic/Endpoint/elastic-endpoint test output
------

[discrete]
=== Example output

[source,txt]
----

> Testing output connections using config file: [C:\Program Files\Elastic\Endpoint\elastic-endpoint.yaml]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Testing output connections
```
The path was appended up to 8.14, since 8.15 we're no longer using `yaml` config file so we changed the message.

Using proxy:

Elasticsearch server: https://example.elastic.co:443
        Status: Success

Global artifact server: https://artifacts.security.elastic.co
        Status: Success

Fleet server: https://fleet.example.elastic.co:443
        Status: Success
----

[discrete]
[[elastic-endpoint-top-command]]
== elastic-endpoint top

> Show a breakdown of the executables that triggered {elastic-endpoint} CPU usage within the last interval. This utility displays which {elastic-endpoint} features are resource-intensive for a particular executable.

Reviewer: Another word choice nit: this is just a single command, but typically I think of a "utility" more as a small application that performs several different actions or commands.
```suggestion
Show a breakdown of the executables that triggered {elastic-endpoint} CPU usage within the last interval. This displays which {elastic-endpoint} features are resource-intensive for a particular executable.
```
